---
layout: post
title: How I installed an AI locally on my Raspberry Pi 5
date: 2026-06-23 18:00:00
description: It's easier than you think.
tags: ai code future
categories: tutorials
featured: true
---

Now by the looks of it, this may seem impossible because most people think that AI needs top-level computers and a data center. Although, they can be run on personal devices! Today we will be able to install an AI on a Raspberry Pi 5; a computer the size of a credit card.

## 1. Install Raspberry Pi OS

First of all we will need to install the operating system on the Pi. You can do this by using the Raspberry Pi Imager or holding `Shift` while booting for Network Install.  
     
> This will erase all data on the storage unit. Back up all data before preceding. If you are using Network Install, make sure you are connected to the Internet via Ethernet. If you boot into something else, unplug the storage unit, try again, then plug in the storage unit after booting into Network Install.

## 2. Install Ollama

After you install the operating system, you will need to install Ollama, which is a service which installs and runs AI models on your device. To do this run the cURL command for the Ollama installer.

```bash  
curl -fsSL https://ollama.com/install.sh | sh  
```

## 3. Install Gemma

   Now that we have installed Ollama, we can install an AI model. Let's go with Gemma 2B.

```bash  
ollama pull gemma:2b  
```  
Now run it:  
```bash  
ollama run gemma:2b  
```

## 4. Install Open WebUI

Now that our AI is running, let's make it have a user interface. To do this, we will use Open WebUI. To install Open WebUI, first make its venv.

```bash  
python3 -m venv venv  
```  
Then activate the venv.  
```bash  
source venv/bin/activate  
```  
Now we can move on to installing Open WebUI.  
Install Open WebUI via pip:  
```bash  
pip install open-webui  
```  
Run Open WebUI  
```bash  
open-webui serve  
```  
> ##### TIP
> Getting Stuck? Check out [Open WebUI’s documentation](https://docs.openwebui.com/getting-started/quick-start/#venv-steps).
{: .block-tip }

## 5. Explore
Now that you have finished this guide, you can explore AI models without needing an internet connection!
